WRITING AS A MECHANIC

For a long time I've wanted to create an interactive piece about the
process of writing. That's partly a reaction to the completely
unrealistic way movies portray writing: the writer either "has
writer's block" and stares angstfully at a typewriter, or else she is
touched by the muse and types all night, and the result is a
manuscript of instant brilliance.  

Presumably the writers of these screenplays know from experience that
that's not usually what happens, but the trope is powerful and
persists anyway.  

Perhaps the issue is that the real nature of writing -- as a process
of revising, weighing word choices, evolving a text gradually over a
long period around changing expectations of what it should even be
saying -- is really very hard to narrate. It involves small,
particular choices and a great deal of nuance.  

I was also really interested in the way -- though this is rarely
discussed in fiction at all -- the act of writing inevitably changes
what you want to say; the way it can be a process, not just of setting
down a concept already fully formed in the mind, but of discovering
what it is you meant in the first place.  

So when I considered mechanics for an interactive story about writing,
the question immediately was what constraints I'd need to put on the
writing in order to make it interesting. Writing is already active,
but it wouldn't be a good interactive story to hand the reader a blank
sheet of paper and say "go for it." Plainly it would need to be a
story about *some particular person* writing *something specific* --
that is, they'd need already to have some goals for what they were
trying to communicate, and some reason why different choices might be
better or worse.  

More than that, the writing process would need to be cumulative, so
that new possibilities opened up based on old choices -- as the writer
thought of new examples or arguments or issues. 

Next I needed a strong emotional context for what was being
written. It would be a real challenge to do a compelling interactive
story about writing a term paper or designing the manual for a new
product, however important those tasks might be. And an interactive
story about writing a poem seemed too inward, too navel-gazing. So I
settled on the idea of an interactive epistolary story, so that the
contents could be as personal and high-stakes as possible. 


WRITING AS TEXTURE

When I thought of the plot for "First Draft," the interactive
epistolary mechanic seemed to fit for two reasons. 

First, in "First Draft of the Revolution," the act and experience of
writing is tied to aristocratic identity. These characters belong to a
world in which literacy rates are not high, and their ability to write
and communicate quickly is part of the magic-based luxury they enjoy
in their lives.  

The textured, deluxe presentation of the text invites the reader into
that privileged experience. It encourages her to identify and feel
complicit with the aristocratic characters, and their natural desire
to protect the advantages they have -- both to establish a rapport,
and to raise the tension later in the story when she discovers the
poverty and limited options of the less privileged characters. 

The second point is that interactively revising text involves
*multiple simultaneous choices* which influence one another. Instead
of asking the reader "then what did the character do?" or "what
happened next?" -- as choose your own adventure stories do -- "First
Draft of the Revolution" asks the reader to consider a number of
simultaneous decisions, try them out, take some of them back, and
finally settle on an acceptable version before moving on. 

This pattern of choice-making is more contemplative and gentle-paced
than one that stakes everything on single decisions. It also, I
believe, engages the reader's faculties in a more creative way,
because the decisions she's making are partly aesthetic. Does the
letter read better this way or that way? How does it feel if the
opening is antagonistic but the ending is endearing? What about vice
versa?  

Not all readers will necessarily focus on this aspect of the reading
experience, and that's fine, but I wanted that aesthetic pleasure to
be available to those who would value it. 


THE CHANGING BRIEF

Originally I imagined "First Draft" as a story with several possible
outcomes, in which Juliette had already had an affair with the friar
and was now being pressured to side with him against her aristocratic
husband, and had to choose carefully what to say in her letters to
both friar and husband in order to avoid exposure. 

This changed when, as period research, I read the first part of
_Delphine_ by Madame de Sta‘l -- a French epistolary novel set just
after the period I was using. What leapt out at me was the characters'
concern with religion and religious institutions alongside traditional
status and social jockeying.  

I had made my villain a friar early in the process (in fact this was
already determined by the other work I'm doing in the same story
universe), but I felt that maybe I hadn't given enough consideration
to what that might mean for Juliette's interactions with him. Besides,
I was writing a story that was not only about the tension between
Juliette and her husband, but about the moral dimension of the
aristocracy and its magic-using.  

As my intentions for the work became more about these issues, I backed
off the initial concept, which would have been about the *challenge*
of getting to a solution that didn't kill Juliette or her husband. I
decied that too much strategic thinking of that kind would distract
the player from focusing on the thematic issues that I now wanted to
explore; so I lightened up the use of consequences for Juliette's
actions.  


EXPRESSIVENESS AND CHARACTERIZATION

By helping to revise their letters, the reader exposes who the
characters are. She doesn't define or change them. Juliette, Henri,
and the others are meant to have consistent personalities, and there's
nothing the reader can do to alter this fact.  

She can, however, see what constraints and concerns affect each
character. Juliette and Henri each have things they're not willing to
express to the other. The reader can also how far each one could be
pushed (how assertive can Juliette be before her inner censor kicks
in? how warm is Henri at his warmest?). 

The sheer amount of correction each character does is significant as
well. The story is partly about how Juliette comes to be able to
assert herself against Henri's authority and the threats she sees
around her. That shows up in the interaction as a greater range in
what she's willing to put to paper. 

By contrast, Henri's style of revision is at first more confident and
less repetitive than Juliette's, in that he begins with a rigorously
logical list of what he wants to accomplish: it's almost as though he
views the task of writing to his wife as a design problem to be
solved. This sets up the contrast later in the story when he loses
emotional control over himself.  

The two interaction arcs contrast. Over the course of the story,
Juliette's thoughts about what to write become more focused on what
she wants to achieve and less on what she fears will provoke Henri;
Henri meanwhile becomes less purely instrumental in his approach. 

All the same, Juliette and Henri are more alike than different. When
we finally see a passage of text written by the mysterious friar, it's
meant to be strikingly unlike the other writing in the story. It is
coarse in both what it says and the way it's expressed: though he is
in fact a skilled emotional manipulator, the friar does not belong to
the same world as the protagonists, and his manner of writing is one
of the most unmistakable signs of the fact.  

The text drives this home by making the friar's text the only one that
the reader cannot influence or control at all; he's a driving
influence at the heart of the story but is not knowable in the same
way as the other characters. 

Presenting "First Draft" through interactive letter-writing allows me
to focus on the interpersonal dynamics at a very granular level. I'm
really interested in problems of how people communicate -- how they
manipulate one another, how they assert control or social dominance,
how they allow themselves to be vulnerable -- and I want to show those
interactions rather than telling them. "Juliette agonized over whether
to tell Henri she missed him" is a less immediate expression of the
problem than actually showing what she's considering writing and what
she decides to write instead. 

At the same time, it would be very challenging (at least for me) to
write a non-interactive short story that dwelled on these questions of
word choice, and self-torment about exactly what was and wasn't
appropriate to say, without it quickly becoming very tiresome for the
reader. 

[TANGENTIAL NOTE: This is not *completely* unique. Atlus'
<em>Catherine</em> uses a text message composition system where the
protagonist can cycle through several different texting options for
each sentence before sending the completed text, and the combination
of tonal choices affects the response he receives.  (Though I didn't
play <em>Catherine</em> until many months after "First Draft" was
designed; it was not an influence on my work.) Even in that example,
though, the degree of variation in output is more limited than in
"First Draft", and the focus is on making decisions rather than
exploring a character's personality.] 


EXPAND AND ADVANCE

"First Draft of the Revolution" tries to avoid wearing out the
reader's interest  by indicating clearly when the reader can choose to
expand the story and when she can choose to advance.  

"Expand vs advance" is terminology I picked up from improv
theater. The Expand/Advance dichotomy appears in some form or other in
lots of interactive stories and games, and there's a variety of
terminology to talk about it, but I like Expand/Advance because it's
clear, not genre-specific, and doesn't carry much judgment. 

The idea is, essentially, that in developing a story interactively,
you can either advance (tell the next thing that happens) or expand
(provide more depth and explanation about the thing you're currently
focused on). Some people would consider "expansion" the same thing as
exposition, but exposition tends to be associated with tedious
passages of explanation. Expansion might instead be the choice to
dramatize an issue, a character relationship, or an emotion that would
otherwise remain opaque to the reader. 

A story that is all advancement likely doesn't provide enough
information and emotional context to make the reader care very
much. Traditional fables are often told in an all-advancement format,
which makes them fast-paced, but doesn't give the reader much of an
opportunity to identify with the characters or develop a deep
understanding of the world in which they occur. 

On the other hand, a story that doesn't advance fast enough for the
reader's taste will seem to drag, and this is an even more serious
problem for interactive stories than for conventional ones. The act of
interaction can make a story more imminent and compelling when things
are going well -- but when things go badly, it turns the story into
*work*.  

My aim in interactive stories, therefore, is 

	1) to figure out exactly what information the reader *must*
	experience by expansion in order to have the minimum
	understanding and engagement with the plot 
	2) to make other expansion strictly optional
	3) to give the reader clear, consistent clues about which
	options will lead to expansion and which will lead to
	advancement 

The form of "First Draft" is designed to support this structure. The
"Send Letter" option at the bottom of the page always means that the
story will advance: we'll find out what comes next. A few changes on
each page are required, and this is because these represent the most
basic information the reader must have in order to understand the
meaning of the story. Other changes -- for instance, expanding out
Juliette's description of the bastard son to give more details or more
thoughts about his abilities -- are purely optional. They're intended
to reward the reader who is interested in those topics, but not to
delay one who isn't. 


