  "Will you read me a story?"                                      

  "Read you a story? What fun would that be? I've                  
  got a better idea: let's tell a story together."

  - PHOTOPIA (2000), Adam Cadre

Transforming digital text into interactive narrative was one of the
first impulses in computing. Limitations in graphics meant that the
very first computer games, distributed via the early internet, were
text-based (cf. Colossal Cave, 1975). 

Text-based gaming offers a wealth of experimentation, but typing
commands at a computer can be frustrating and is seen as an obsolete
form of interaction.  While hypertext fiction has existed even
before the web, it has largely been relegated to the academic world;
such works are considered experimental, not meant to be enjoyed as
narrative fiction. The interactive narratives that have found the
widest audience appeal have been crude choose-your-own-adventure
branching storylines. Many reject this conceit as a meaningful form of
expression. "Art seeks to lead you to an inevitable conclusion, not a
smorgasbord of choices," writes Roger Ebert in one of his many
critiques of videogames as art. Ebert's overall position is probably
short-sighted, but his point about the importance of authorial intent
is valid and should be explored.

Following the model of a content author paired with a technology 
implementor, I commissioned an interactive piece from game designer
Emily Short with three constraints: it must be primarily textual, have
a clear authorial vision, and use a simple touch-based interface that
could be implemented in an EPUB 3 device or web browser.

_First Draft of the Revolution_ is an epistolary story set in a
parallel history in which written documents are magically linked. The
reader is presented with each letter in sequence, where each sentence
fades in sequentially to reflect the "magical" transition between sender and
receiver. The letters are at first incomplete (or impetuous) and cannot
be sent as-is. User interface clues (such as red text) hint which passages need
to be revised; tapping on those passages allows the reader to edit
or erase them altogether. While the message of each letter is
authorially fixed, readers control the tone and how much is revealed
in each response (while learning the backstory and motivations behind
each narrator's words). At the time of this writing, _First
Draft of the Revolution_ is still being finalized, but we intend to
publish it as a free EPUB 3 book: to put it distinctly among other
books, not games. 

The presentation will cover the above topics briefly: the problems
inherent in interactive narrative, a demonstration of the work, and a
release of an open source framework for creating further stories with
the engine. I will argue that the joy of discovery, of uncovering
hidden pathways through narrative, will be the key motivator for
readers of future interactive works. 
